Alfred: Hi, can you explain to me how compression works in MongoDB? Bruce: Sure! MongoDB uses the WiredTiger storage engine by default, which supports multiple compression algorithms. By default, WiredTiger uses Snappy compression for collection data and zlib for indexes. Alfred: What is Snappy compression and why does MongoDB use it? Bruce: Snappy is a fast compression and decompression library developed by Google. MongoDB uses it because it provides a good balance between compression ratio and CPU overhead. It doesn't achieve the highest compression ratio, but it's very fast, which is important for a database handling many concurrent operations. Alfred: Are there other compression options available? Bruce: Yes! MongoDB also supports zlib and zstd compression. Zlib gives you a better compression ratio than Snappy but uses more CPU. Zstd, available from MongoDB 4.2 onwards, offers the best of both worlds — it achieves high compression ratios with relatively low CPU usage, making it a great choice for large datasets. Alfred: How do I configure the compression algorithm in MongoDB? Bruce: You can set the compression algorithm when you create a collection by using the storageEngine option. For example: db.createCollection("myCollection", { storageEngine: { wiredTiger: { configString: "block_compressor=zstd" } } }) Alfred: Does compression affect query performance? Bruce: It can, depending on the algorithm. Snappy has very low CPU overhead so the impact is minimal. Zlib can slow things down slightly due to higher CPU usage during compression and decompression. However, compression generally improves performance indirectly because it reduces the amount of data that must be read from disk, which is usually the bottleneck. Alfred: What about network compression? Is that different? Bruce: Great question! MongoDB also supports network compression between clients and servers, as well as between replica set members and shards. It supports Snappy, zlib, and zstd for this too. You can enable it in the mongod.conf file under the net.compression.compressors setting. Alfred: How do I check what compression is being used on an existing collection? Bruce: You can use the db.collection.stats() command. It returns detailed storage statistics including the compression ratio and the compressor being used. Look for the wiredTiger section in the output to find that information. Alfred: That's really helpful! One more question — does MongoDB Atlas handle compression differently? Bruce: MongoDB Atlas uses the same WiredTiger engine with the same compression options. Atlas clusters default to Snappy compression for data, but you can specify your preferred compressor when creating collections. Atlas also automatically compresses snapshots used for backups, which helps reduce storage costs significantly. Alfred: Thanks, Bruce! This really cleared things up for me. Bruce: Happy to help! Compression is one of those features that works silently in the background but makes a huge difference in storage efficiency and performance. Let me know if you have more questions!